# News - 16 series

(release-16-05)=
## Release 16.05 - 2026-06-19

:::{note}
In this release, we do not provide Mroonga packages with MySQL 8.4 for apt temporary.
Currently, the Mroonga apt package cannot be installed with MySQL 8.4.10 due to a dependency issue.
For details, refer to https://bugs.mysql.com/bug.php?id=120697.
We can provide them again when this issue is resolved upstream.
:::

### Improvements

#### Added support for MariaDB 10.6.27 in the following OS

* AlmaLinux 8, 9

#### Added support for MariaDB 10.11.18 in the following OS

* AlmaLinux 8, 9, 10

#### Added support for MariaDB 11.4.12 in the following OS

* AlmaLinux 8, 9, 10

#### Added support for MariaDB 11.8.8 in the following OS

* AlmaLinux 8, 9, 10

#### Added support for MySQL 8.0.46 in the following OS

* Ubuntu 22.04, 24.04

#### Added support for MySQL 8.4.10 in the following OS

* AlmaLinux 8, 9, 10

#### Added support for Percona Server for MySQL 8.0.46-37 in the following OS

* AlmaLinux 8, 9

#### Dropped support for Debian 12

It reached EOL at 2026-06-10.

(release-16-01)=
## Release 16.01 - 2026-03-30

### Improvements

#### Added support for Percona Server for MySQL 8.0.45-36 in the following OS

* AlmaLinux 8, 9

8.0.45-36 is the latest Percona Server for MySQL 8.0 release.

#### Added support for Percona Server for MySQL 8.4.8-8 in the following OS

* AlmaLinux 9, 10

8.4.8-8 is the latest Percona Server for MySQL 8.4 release.

#### Added support for MariaDB 11.8.6 on Debian 13

This is the latest MariaDB 11.8 release.

#### Dropped support for `engine "XXX"` in CONNECTION for wrapper mode

[[MDEV-38530]( https://jira.mariadb.org/browse/MDEV-38530 )][Reported by Roel Van de Paar]

Mroonga accepted `engine "XXX"` for wrapper mode not only in `COMMENT` but also in `CONNECTION`.
However, this behavior was neither documented nor tested, so support for it has been removed.

### Fixes

#### Fixed a crash bug that occurred when `mroonga_log_file` was set `NULL` or an empty string

[[GH-1069]( https://github.com/mroonga/mroonga/pull/1069 )][Patched by Hadeer Ramadan]

Setting `NULL` or an empty string as shown below caused a `SIGSEGV`.

```sql
SET GLOBAL mroonga_log_file = NULL;
```

```sql
SET GLOBAL mroonga_log_file = '';
```

### Thanks

- Hadeer Ramadan
- Roel Van de Paar
