.. highlightlang:: none

.. _release-2-10:

Release 2.10 - 2012/12/29
-------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported to use ENABLE KEYS/DISABLE KEYS against table whose charset is
  different from system charset. [Reported by @kokoronavi]
* Improved to show the value of duplicated key on error message.
* Supported MySQL 5.6.9-rc. [#1547] [#1548] [Reported by wing]
* [storage] Supported to use ``GROUP BY`` with index.
  This change improves search speed against ``GROUP BY``.
* Dropped Ubuntu 11.04 (Natty Narwhal) support.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [rpm][centos] Fixed to use MySQL 5.1.66-2 on CentOS 6. [Reported by @wakisuke.ua]
* Fixed a bug that ``MATCH AGAINST`` with ``INNER JOIN`` syntax causes an error.
  [Reported by ooshiro]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @kokoronavi
* @wakisuke.ua
* wing
* ooshiro

.. _release-2-09:

Release 2.09 - 2012/11/29
-------------------------

.. caution::

   This release has backward incompatible changes against ``TIMESTAMP``
   value and primary indexed char(N).

   ``TIMESTAMP`` value is changed to store as UTC timezone.
   If you have any table that uses ``TIMESTAMP`` column with no UTC timezone,
   please recreate (dump and restore) database.

   If you have any table that uses char(N) as primary key,
   please recreate index.

   Here is a procedure how to recreate database or recreate index.

Dump a database that uses mroonga::

  % mysqldump MY_MROONGA_DATABASE > database-mroonga.dump

Restore a database by modified dump file::

  % mysql -u root MY_MROONGA_DATABASE < database-mroonga.dump

Recreate a index::

   mysql> ALTER TABLE table_name DROP PRIMARY KEY;
   mysql> ALTER TABLE table_name ADD PRIMARY KEY(column_name);

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [rpm][centos] Supported MySQL 5.5.28 on CentOS 5.
* [rpm][centos] Supported MySQL 5.1.61 on CentOS 6.
* [wrapper mode] Supported last_insert_id() [#1540] [Reported by @soundkitchen]

Fixes
^^^^^

* [mysql51] Fixed crash bug by checking existence of utf8mb4.
  MySQL 5.1 doesn't have utf8mb4. [groonga-dev,01069] [Reported by wakisuke]
* [storage mode] Fixed impossible deleting problem that matched records.
  [#1533] [Reported by @HANZUBON]
* Fixed a bug that primary indexed char(N) can't be searched.
  This bug affects if any value of char(N) has M-length (M < N) string or
  it has one more spaces at the last and require index recreation.
* Fixed a bug that content after NULL character is ignored for char(N)
* Fixed to store ``TIMESTAMP`` value as UTC timezone.
  This is backward incompatible change.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @soundkitchen
* wakisuke
* @HANZUBON

.. _release-2-08:

Release 2.08 - 2012/10/29
-------------------------

.. caution::

   This release has a backward incompatible change against multiple
   column index. If you have any tables that uses
   any multiple comlumn indexes against VARCHAR or CHAR,
   please recreate those indexes by ``ALTER TABLE DISABLE KEYS``
   and ``ALTER TABLE ENBALE KEYS``::

     mysql> ALTER TABLE table_name DISABLE KEYS;
     mysql> ALTER TABLE table_name ENABLE KEYS;

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [storage mode] Supported ``INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TABLES.DATA_LENGTH``.
  [Suggested by @9m]
* Supported utf8mb4. [groonga-dev,01049] [Reported by warp kawada]
* Supported Ubuntu 12.10 (Quantal Quetzal)
* [rpm][fedora] Supported MySQL 5.5.28.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [storage mode] Fixed unique judge problem of multiple column unique index
  with date column. [groonga-dev,01041] [#1495] [Reported by jd fonc]
* Fixed a bug that ``WHERE index < XXX ORDER BY DESC`` doesn't sort by descending.
  [Reported by @taro252]
* [rpm] Fixed missing ``DROP FUNCTION mroonga_snippet``.
  [Reported by @tokuhy]
* Fixed range search by multi column index by int.
* [doc] Fixed wrong command line operation during build process.
  [groonga-dev,01061] [Reported by Kazuhiro Isobe]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @9m
* warp kawada
* jd fonc
* @taro252
* @tokuhy
* Kazuhiro Isobe

.. _release-2-07:

Release 2.07 - 2012/09/29
-------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [deb] Enabled AppArmor configuration for MeCab. [Reported by @Qurage]
* [storage mode][experimental] Added mroonga_snippet() function. [#1442]

Fixes
^^^^^

* [rpm] Fixed ``groonga_required_version``. [groonga-dev,01033] [Reported by wing]
* Fixed datetime out of range problems. [groonga-dev,01035] [#1476]
  [Reported by Nakatani Munetaka]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @Qurage
* wing
* Nakatani Munetaka

.. _release-2-06:

Release 2.06 - 2012/08/29
-------------------------

.. caution::

   This release has a backward compatibility about a database.
   But this release depends on new functionality introduced at groonga 2.0.6.
   Note that you must use mroonga 2.06 with groonga 2.0.6.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported "-WORD" syntax in BOOLEAN MODE.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed nallowing records by "order by" clause with fulltext condition.
  [groonga-dev,00977] [#1422] [Reported by Nakatani Munetaka]
* Removed needless build flags. [#1453] [Reported by @nabebeb]
* [rpm][centos] Fixed missing mysql-devel BuildRequires. 
  [groonga-dev,01009] [Reported by wing]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @nabebeb
* wing
* Nakatani Munetaka

.. _release-2-05:

Release 2.05 - 2012/07/29
-------------------------

.. caution::

   This release has a backward incompatible change against SET column
   and ENUM.
   If you use SET column or ENUM that has the number of elements < 256
   in :doc:`/tutorial/storage`, please recreate (dump and restore)
   database.

Here is upgrade sequence.

Dump a database that uses mroonga::

  % mysqldump MY_MROONGA_DATABASE > database-mroonga.dump

Drop the existing database::

  % mysql -u root -e 'DROP DATABASE MY_MROONGA_DATABASE'

You must upgrade to "mroonga" storage engine. Use
``apt-get`` on Debian GNU/Linux or Ubuntu and ``yum`` on
CentOS or Fedora.

apt-get::

  % sudo apt-get install -y mysql-server-mroonga

yum (upgrade from mroonga release prior to v2.02)::

  % sudo yum remove -y mysql-mroonga
  % sudo yum install -y mysql-mroonga

yum (upgrade from mroonga release v2.03 or later)::

  % sudo yum install -y mysql-mroonga

.. caution::

   Don't forget to run ``yum remove`` before ``yum
   install`` if you upgrade mroonga prior to v2.02 release.
   If you forget to run ``yum remove``, we will break
   a MySQL's system table.

Recreate a database::

  % mysql -u root -e 'CREATE DATABASE MY_MROONGA_DATABASE'

Restore a database by modified dump file::

  % mysql -u root MY_MROONGA_DATABASE < database-mroonga.dump

Now, we can use mroonga 2.05.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [storage mode] Supported index for SET column.
* [rpm] Supported MySQL 5.5.25a.
* Supported Fedora 17.
* Dropped Fedora 16 support.
* [storage mode] Supported TINYINT UNSIGNED/SMALLINT UNSIGNED/
  MEDIUMINT UNSIGNED/INT UNSIGNED/BIGINT UNSIGNED type.
* [storage mode] Reduced storage size for ENUM.

.. _release-2-04:

Release 2.04 - 2012/06/29
-------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [wrapper mode] Supported disable/enable keys in bulk insert. [#1311]

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed to disable query cache with transaction. [#1384]
* Disabled partition explicitly. [#1391]
* [rpm][deb] Fixed to ensure deleting mroonga plugin from ``mysql.plugin`` table
  before install. [groonga-dev,00948] [Suggested by Kazuhiro Isobe]
* Fixed a crash bug by setting nonexistent path to ``mroonga_log_file``
  variable. [#1404] [Reported by @nabebeb]
* [experimental] Supported mroonga related data path change.
  [groonga-dev,00914] [#1392] [Suggested by Kazuhiro Isobe]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Kazuhiro Isobe
* @nabebeb

.. _release-2-03:

Release 2.03 - 2012/05/29
-------------------------

.. caution::

   This release has a backward incompatible change against multiple
   column index. If you have any tables that uses
   :doc:`/tutorial/storage` and any multiple comlumn indexes, please
   recreate those indexes by ``ALTER TABLE DISABLE KEYS`` and ``ALTER
   TABLE ENBALE KEYS``::

     mysql> ALTER TABLE table_name DISABLE KEYS;
     mysql> ALTER TABLE table_name ENABLE KEYS;

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [storage mode] Supported disable/enable keys in bulk insert.
  [#1310]
* [rpm][centos] Supported MySQL 5.5.24.
* [rpm][fedora] Supported MySQL 5.5.23.
* Added :ref:`server-variable-mroonga-match-escalation-threshold`
  system variable.
* Required groonga 2.0.3 or later.
* [yum] Changed RPM package name that provides yum repository from
  groonga-repository to groonga-release to follow RPM package name
  convension such as centos-release and fedora-release.
* [mac os x] Supported installing by Homebrew.
  See :doc:`/install` about details.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed build failure on Mac OS X.
* [wrapper mode] Fixed a bug that searching in transaction reports not
  found error.
  [#1322][groonga-dev,00746] [Reported by Takken Ishibashi]
* [rpm] Fixed a bug that mroonga plugin is unregistered when upgrading.
  [groonga-dev,00810]
  [Reported by Takken Ishibashi] [Patch by Iwai, Masaharu]
* Fixed a bug that row based replication transfers wrong data on MySQL
  5.5 or earlier.
  [#1379][groonga-dev,00902] [Reported by Kenji Doi]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Takken Ishibashi
* Iwai, Masaharu
* Kenji Doi

.. _release-2-02:

Release 2.02 - 2012/04/29
-------------------------

.. caution::

   The package sign key is changed since this release. Import the new
   package sign key before updating groogna packages.

   Debian/Ubuntu::

     % sudo apt-get update
     % sudo apt-get -y --allow-unauthenticated install groonga-keyring

   CentOS/Fedora::

     % sudo yum update
     % sudo yum install --nogpgcheck -y groonga-repository

.. caution::

   This release breaks a backward compatibility for ``ENUM`` type. If
   you have ``ENUM`` type and it has 256 or more values, you need to
   dump your table before upgrade and restore your table after
   upgrade.

.. caution::

   This release breaks a backward compatibility for ``SET`` type. If
   you have ``SET`` type and it has 32 or more values, you need to
   dump your table before upgrade and restore your table after
   upgrade.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added workaround for build for GCC 4.7 and MySQL 5.5.22.
  The combination makes build error with ``-Wdeprecated`` gcc
  option. [#1337] [Reported by Kazuhiko Shiozaki]
* [mariadb] Supported MariaDB 5.5.23.
  [#1339] [Reported by Kazuhiko Shiozaki] [Reported by Ryo Onodera]
* [storage mode] Stopped needless primary key truncated warning on
  ``REPLACE``.
* [storage mode] Supported search ``ENUM`` values by index. [#1336]
  [Suggested by @104yuki_n]
* [incompatible] Changed groonga type for ``ENUM`` to unsigned 2bytes
  integer type from signed 2bytes integer type. ``ENUM`` column
  recreation is needed.
* [incompatible] Changed groonga type for ``SET`` to unsigned 8bytes
  integer type from signed 8bytes integer type. ``SET`` column
  recreation is needed.
* Supported MySQL 5.5.23.
* Required groonga 2.0.2 or later.
* [incompatible][experimental] Changed to use similar search instead
  of phrase search for ``MATCH AGAINST IN NATURAL LANGUAGE MODE``.
* [apt][yum] Changed package sign key.
* Supported Ubuntu 12.04 Precise Pangolin.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [storage mode] Fixed wrong key length is used.
* Fixed a crash bug that is caused when searching with updaging very large
  inverted index. [#1321]
  [groonga-dev,00743] [Reported by Takashi Kawano]
  [groonga-dev,00746] [Reported by Takken Ishibashi]
* Fixed a bug that truncated table has invalid tokenizer and encoding.
  [#1335] [Reported by @boss_sato]
* Fixed a bug that the first insert is failed with Spider and mroonga
  combination. [#1319] [groonga-dev,00736] [Reported by Takayuki Honda]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Takashi Kawano
* @boss_sato
* Kazuhiko Shiozaki
* Ryo Onodera
* @104yuki_n
* Takayuki Honda
* Takken Ishibashi

.. _release-2-01:

Release 2.01 - 2012/03/29
-------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported MySQL 5.5.22.
* Supported MySQL 5.1.62.
* Required groonga 2.0.1 or later.
* [rpm] Improved plugin uninstall on upgrade.
* [rpm] Improved plugin uninstall on upgrade.
* [wrapper mode] Supported ``INSERT ON DUPLICATE KEY ERROR``
  with MyISAM. [#1300] [Reported by @104yuki_n]
* [wrapper mode] Used wrapped table's ``table_flags()``
  correctly. [#1304]
* Added ``--with-valgrind`` configure option for MySQL that
  enables Valgrind support.
* [mariadb] Supported ``DATETIME`` type with fraction
  seconds.
* Supported building without geometry support.
  [#1313] [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [storage mode] Supported multiple column index with
  optimization build flags on i386 environment.
  [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [wrapper mode] Confirmed InnoDB tests are passed with
  wrapper mode.
* [solaris] Supported build on Solaris 11. [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [mariadb55] Supported ``mroonga_default_parser`` with
  MariaDB 5.5. [#1314] [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [mariadb55] Supported ``ORDER LIMIT`` optimization with
  MariaDB 5.5. [#1315] [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [doc] Added about MeCab.
* [storage mode] Supported index search for 0 value.
  [Reported by @104yuki_n]
* [storage mode] Supported Ubuntu Hardy with optimize
  build flags. [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* Added `logos <http://mroonga.github.com/logo/>`_ .
* Updated HTML design.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [storage mode] Fixed a memory leak.
* [storage mode] Fixed a bug that search by multi column
  index may not return some found records.
  [#1300] [Reported by @ytaka5]
* [storage mode] Fixed a bug that ``COUNT (*)`` isn't effective.
  [groonga-dev,00717] [Reported by Takayuki Honda]
* Fixed a memory leak on ``DROP DATABASE``.
* [storage mode] Fixed a bug that ``last_insert_grn_id()``
  may return broken value on 32bit environment.
  [Reported by Kazuhiko]
* [storage mode] Fixed a bug that ``COUNT (*)`` may
  return 0. [groonga-dev,00736] [Reported by Takayuki Honda]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @ytaka5
* @104yuki_n
* Takayuki Honda
* Kazuhiko

.. _release-2-00:

Release 2.00 - 2012/02/29
-------------------------

.. caution::

   This release breaks backward compatibility. We need to
   dump and restore our database for upgrading.

In this release, mroonga has two changes that requires
database recreation:

1. Supported all characters for database, table and column
   names.
2. Groonga's native time data type is used for ``YEAR`` type
   in MySQL.

Here are upgrade sequence.

We dump a database that uses mroonga::

  % mysqldump MY_MROONGA_DATABASE > database-mroonga.dump

We drop the existing database::

  % mysql -u root -e 'DROP DATABASE MY_MROONGA_DATABASE'

We upgrade to "mroonga" storage engine. We will use
``apt-get`` on Debian GNU/Linux or Ubuntu and ``yum`` on
CentOS or Fedora.

apt-get::

  % sudo apt-get install -y mysql-server-mroonga

yum::

  % sudo yum remove -y mysql-mroonga
  % sudo yum install -y mysql-mroonga

.. caution::

   We don't forget to run ``yum remove`` before ``yum
   install``. If we forget to run ``yum remove``, we will break
   a MySQL's system table.

We recreate a database::

  % mysql -u root -e 'CREATE DATABASE MY_MROONGA_DATABASE'

We restore a database by modified dump file::

  % mysql -u root MY_MROONGA_DATABASE < database-mroonga.dump

Now, we can use mroonga 2.00.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Supported MySQL 5.5.21.
* Required groonga 2.0.0 or later.
* Supported TIMESTAMP with fractional seconds on MySQL 5.6 and MariaDB.
* [storage mode] Supported ``ORDER LIMIT`` optimization on no primary key.
* [storage mode] Supported ``ORDER LIMIT`` optimization with
  fulltext search and ``COLUMN = INT_VALUE``.
* [storage mode] Supported fulltext search in sub query.
  [Reported by @camyuy]
* [incompatible] Mapped ``YEAR`` in MySQL to ``Time`` in
  groonga to improve groonga integration.
* [storage mode] Removed a needless write lock on update.
  [#1271] [Reported by Takahiro Nagai]
* Added ``mroonga_enable_optimization`` system variable to
  on/off optimization. It's useful for benchmark.
* [wrapper mode] Supported temporary table. [#1267]
* [incompatible] Supported ``/`` in database name. [#1281]
* Suppressed needless messages on ``INSERT ... ON DUPLICATE
  KEY UPDATE``.
* Supported ``INSERT ... ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE`` with
  ``UNIQUE KEY``. [#1283] [Reported by @104yuki_n]
* Supported ``DATETIME``, ``DATE``, ``TIMESTAMP``, ``TIME``,
  ``DECIMAL``, ``YEAR`` for primary key.
* [incompatible] Supported all characters for database, table and
  column names. [#1284]
* [wrapper mode] Supported 255 bytes over index. [#1282]
* [wrapper mode] Supported updating primary key. [#1195]
* [wrapper mode] Supported error handling on ``ALTER TABLE``. [#1195]
* [wrapper mode] Improved error message on unsupported
  geometry type like ``LineString``. [#1195]
* [wrapper mode] Supported
  ``INFORMATION_SCHEMA.REFERENTIAL_CONSTRAINTS``. [#1195]

Fixes
^^^^^

* [rpm] Changed to ensure re-install plugin.
* [doc] Fixed wrong storage engine name. [Reported by Tomoatsu Shimada]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @camyuy
* Takahiro Nagai
* Tomoatsu Shimada
* @104yuki_n
