News - 8 series
===============

.. _release-8-09:

Release 8.09 - 2018-11-29
-------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/install/ubuntu`] Supported Ubuntu 18.10 (Cosmic Cuttlefish).

* [:doc:`/install/windows`] Supported MariaDB 10.3.10.

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported MariaDB 10.2.19

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported MariaDB 10.1.37

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported Percona Server 5.7.23-25.

* [rpm][centos] Supported MariaDB 10.3.11.

* [rpm][centos] Supported MySQL 5.6.42.

* [rpm][centos] Supported MySQL 5.7.24.

Revision:

We deleted information as below.

"Supported MySQL 8"

Sorry, There was wrong release information in Mroonga 8.09.
The MySQL 8 is not supported. That is still being handled.

.. _release-8-07:

Release 8.07 - 2018-09-29
-------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Deprecated tokenizer ``off`` option. Use tokenizer ``none`` option instead.
* Dropped support for MariaDB 10.2.2 which is shipped at Sep 27, 2016 and older series.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported MariaDB 10.1.36.

.. _release-8-06:

Release 8.06 - 2018-08-29
-------------------------

In this version, MySQL will be automatically restarted if you had
already installed Mroonga and not installed Groonga 8.0.4 or later.
Because Mroonga 8.06 requires Groonga 8.0.4 or later but it will not
reloaded until MySQL is restarted.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Updated required Groonga version to 8.0.4 or later.

* Updated required groonga-normalizer-mysql version to 1.1.3 or later.

* Supported utf8mb4_0900 family collation.

  * ref: https://github.com/groonga/groonga-normalizer-mysql#description

* Supported tokenizer options.

  * e.g.: ``tokenizer "TokenNgram(\'loose_symbol\', true)"``

  * ref: https://groonga.org/docs/news.html#release-8-0-2-2018-04-29

* Use the Groonga's default logger.

* [:doc:`/install/windows`] Updated bundled MariaDB to 10.3.9 from 10.1.33.

  * NOTICE: Before upgrading to MariaDB 10.3, you need to dump existing MariaDB 10.1 databases. Then restore it after upgrading.

* [:doc:`/install/debian`] Dropped Debian 8 (jessie) support.

* [:doc:`/install/ubuntu`] Dropped Ubuntu 17.10 (Artful Aardvark) support.

* [WIP] Working on supporting MySQL 8.

  * The storage mode is almost done (JSON type doesn't work yet).

  * The wrapper mode is in progress.

Fixes
^^^^^

* [storage] Fixed a bug that wrong result may be returned on multi range read.
  [GitHub#211][Reported by colt27]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* colt27

.. _release-8-03:

Release 8.03 - 2018-05-29
-------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/install/docker`] Added quick start guide link to Docker Hub.

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported MariaDB 10.3.7.

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported MariaDB 10.2.15 (backported to 8.02).

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported MariaDB 10.1.33 (backported to 8.02).

Fixes
^^^^^

* [:doc:`/install/ubuntu`] Fixed install failure on Ubntu 14.04 LTS (Trusty)
  (backported to 8.02). [GitHub#202,#205][Reported by Masato Hirai]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Masato Hirai

.. _release-8-02:

Release 8.02 - 2018-04-29
-------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [:doc:`/install/ubuntu`] Supported Ubuntu 18.04 LTS (Bionic Beaver).

* [:doc:`/install/debian`] Supported i386 for Jessie.

* Suppress meaningless "duplicated unique id" error log. [GitHub#197]

* [developer][test] Supported `--record` option.

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Use `groonga-release-latest` instead of `groonga-release-X.X.X`.

* [:doc:`/tutorial/installation_check`] Added version check howto.

* [:doc:`/install/centos`][percona] Supported upgrading from "< 5.6.34" and "< 5.7.21".
  [groonga-dev,04599][Reported by Takashi Kinoshita][Looked into by Satoshi Mitani]

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported MySQL 5.6.40 and 5.7.22.

* [:doc:`/install/centos`] Supported Percona Server 5.7.21-21.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a crash bug when some complex condition in `ORDER BY` such as `ORDER BY 1 + 1, id, content`.

* Fixed a bug that `MATCH AGAINST` condition is ignored if SQL containing such as
  `AND (x = 1 OR x = 2)` when condition push down is enabled.
  [Gitter/ja:5ae014842b9dfdbc3ac7ce1f][Reported by colt27]

* Fixed a memory leak for column caches.

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Takashi Kinoshita

* Satoshi Mitani

* colt27

.. _release-8-01:

Release 8.01 - 2018-03-29
-------------------------

In this version, MySQL will be automatically restarted if you had
already installed Mroonga. This is because Mroonga requires newer
version of Groonga (8.0.1) to fix bugs, but it will not reloaded until
MySQL is restarted.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* [rpm][centos] Supported Percona Server 5.6.39. [Reported by @iiiiyyyy]

* [rpm][centos] Supported Percona Server 5.7.21.

* [rpm][centos] Supported MariaDB 10.2.13. [GitHub#198] [Reported by
  shota suzuki]

* [rpm][centos] Supported MariaDB 10.2.14.

Fixes
^^^^^

* Fixed a bug that wrong cache for other database is used. If you
  create multiple database and use `mroonga_command()` against one of
  them, wrong cache is returned unexpectedly. To fix this issue,
  Groonga 8.0.1 or later is required.

* Fixed a bug that "NOT IN" query returns empty result. This bug
  occurs when "NOT IN" is used with multiple arguments such as "NOT IN
  (xxx, xxx)"

* Fixed a bug that specified "NOT IN" can't exclude correctly when
  condition push down is enabled.

* Fixed a bug that "ORDER BY RAND()" query returns wrong result. This
  bug occurs when "ORDER BY RAND()" and "LIMIT" is specified at the
  same time.

* Fixed a bug that "fast order limit" optimization is applied
  unexpectedly to "ORDER BY function()".

Thanks
^^^^^^

* @iiiiyyyy

* shota suzuki

.. _release-8-00:

Release 8.00 - 2018-02-09
-------------------------

This is a major version up! But It keeps backward compatibility.
You can upgrade to 8.0.0 without rebuilding database.

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* When create hash index, used tiny hash for reducing used resource.

* [percona57] Added gap lock detection support.
  [GitHub#188][Reported by Iwo]

Thanks
^^^^^^

* Iwo
