.. -*- rst -*-
.. Mroonga Project

.. highlight:: none

How to report a bug
===================

There are two ways to report a bug:

  * Submit a bug to the issue tracker
  * Report a bug to the mailing list

You can use either way It makes no difference to us.

Submit a bug to the issue tracker
---------------------------------

Mroonga project uses `GitHub issue tracker
<https://github.com/mroonga/mroonga/issues>`_.

You can use English or Japanese to report a bug.

Report a bug to the mailing list
--------------------------------

Mroonga project has :doc:`/community` for discussing about Mroonga.
Please send an Email that describes a bug.

How to collect data for reporting a reproducible bug
====================================================

There may be a case that Mroonga doesn't work as expected. It may be a crash bug or
SQL returns unexpected search results. To solve such a issues with you, We need a
reproducible bug report.

For a reproducible bug report, it is better to report with the following information as much as you can because it is useful to investigate the reason which causes the bug.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - Environment information
     - Installed packages information to detect what version is used.
       rpm::

           rpm -qa > INSTALLED.txt

       deb::

           dpkg -l > INSTALLED.txt

       On Windows, show us what zip package is used.
   * - Executing query which triggers the issue
     - It shows what you did.
   * - Sample schema and data
     - It is recommended to provide a minimum schema and sample data to reproduce the issue.
       It helps to solve the issue sooner.
   * - MySQL error log
     - It may include backtrace information why crashed unexpectedly.
       It may exists on ``/var/log/mysqld.log`` for example. (It depends on ``log-error`` configuration)
   * - groonga.log
     - It may include low level error information.
       It may exists on ``/var/lib/mysql/groonga.log`` for example. (It depends on ``mroonga_log_file`` configuration)

There is a case that it is not enough to reproduce a bug with above information. For such a case, additional information is required.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - MySQL dump
     - It may be required to construct same database from scratch.
       It may be generated by ``mysqldump -u USER -pPASSWORD --opt --flush-logs --single-transaction --master-data=2 --default-character-set=utf8 --hex-blob --databases DATABASE > dump.sql`` and so on.
   * - MySQL binlog
     - If dump data is enough to reproduce the issue, it is not required.
       It may exists on ``/var/lib/mysql/mysql-bin.*`` for example. (It depends on ``log-bin`` configuration)
   * - MySQL data directory (Offline backup)
     - If dump data and binlog pair is lost, It may be required.
       It may exists on ``/var/lib/mysql/`` for example. (It depends on ``datadir`` configuration)
